---
title: 1.1. Why this Study? Why Now?
slug: c1.1
type: text
hidetitle: true
---

# 1.1 Why this Study? Why Now? <a id="1.1"></a>

<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c1/#1">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c1.2/#1.2">➡️</a></th>
</tr></table>

### Sections:

[1.1](/en/thesis/c1.1/#1.1) Why this Study? Why Now?

<hr>

## 1.1 Why this Study? Why Now?

This thesis was motivated by the desire to put before my academic peers, teacher colleagues, and students a step-change idea for how secondary schooling could be more effectively addressing humanity’s reality in the Anthropocene. I wanted to invite them to carefully consider, critique and hopefully, enthusiastically elaborate on the idea through the co-construction of a Metacurriculum framework. The idea—which I have provisionally named the Sustainable Wellbeing Metacurriculum (SWM)—has been evolving in my mind over many years of a career that included spells as a forest and farm labourer, forest researcher; a high school teacher—in both a state-integrated Rudolf Steiner and mainstream state schools—and as an education Masters student. The idea is a synthesis for me of many influences and interests including global environmental sustainability, human wellbeing, a fascination with Complex Adaptive Systems theory, and the art and science of education. Complex Systems theory offers a way of thinking realistically about human beings, societies and human artefacts as inseparably part of nature. It offers a path toward overcoming the habit of polarised thinking that afflicts educational paradigms and the political life of humankind generally. The SWM is a gesture toward a unifying vision of humanity’s evolution. A vision that may reverse the increasing divergence between holistic worldviews valuing the collective—such as Taoism, Mātauranga Māori, and other Indigenous conceptions of the universe—and the specialised, refined but purposefully separated disciplines and mindsets of the Western capitalist worldview and education, with their underpinning egotistic and materialistic values (Bettache, 2024) that have through their fossil-fuelled hegemony (Wright et al., 2021) led to our current global ecological crisis.

People’s behaviour is deeply rooted in their worldviews and those roots are largely put down in childhood, consolidated in young adulthood and, unless deliberately 
re-examined, largely unconscious in adulthood. That is why I argue that the transformation of education, particularly in the secondary senior years when young people are making crucial decisions for their life’s direction, is a priority for humankind with enormous potential leverage. My daily news feed leaves me in no doubt about the urgency of our crisis and the growing potential for conflict over how to meet it. Being a Matua (father) of two tamahine toa (strong daughters) and koro (grandfather) of four fine mokopuna (grandchildren), as for many of my generation, this project is very much a path of the heart and a matter of our legacy. 

<hr>
<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c1/#1">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c1.2/#1.2">➡️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c1.1/#1.1">⬆️</a></th>  
</tr></table>
