---
title: 2.1 Overview
slug: c2.1
type: text
hidetitle: true
---

# 2.1 Overview <a id="2.1"></a>

<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2/#2">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2">➡️</a></th>  
</tr></table>

### Sections:
[2.1](/en/thesis/c2.1/#2.1) Overview

<hr>

## 2.1 Overview

The Sustainable Wellbeing Metacurriculum (SWM) is an invitation to reconceive the purpose of secondary school education, especially for students in years 11 to 13 in Aotearoa New Zealand in the third decade of the twenty-first century. It is a phrase used to invite unprejudiced re-examination of what knowledge will be of most worth to these young people and what transformation of established schooling systems may be required in light of the scale and complexity of the existential challenges this and future generations are facing. Given also that these challenges have never been experienced by us their teachers nor any previous generations of teachers, where do educators begin, if they accept that transformation, and not merely reform, really is required?

This review of the literature relevant to the challenge of not only conceiving of but also realising an SWM begins in Section 2.2 with an examination of the roots of humanity’s existential crisis in what we have come to call the Anthropocene (Haraway, 2015; Randall, 2022); that is disconnection from nature, from one another; and from ourselves. Complex Adaptive Systems Theory is a stream of Western academic thought compatible with global Indigenous and Eastern philosophical traditions founded on an acceptance of the interconnectedness of all things. In Section 2.3 I investigate the elements of complex systems thinking and find concepts, and geometric analogies that are useful for the SWM exploration. In Section 2.4 I review the diverse ways in which the words *Sustainability* and *Wellbeing* have been interpreted internationally and in Aotearoa New Zealand, and particularly in Education. Also in this section, I define and make a case for the two levels and three-domain structure I adopt for Education for Sustainable Wellbeing (EfSW). In Section 2.5 I explore the inescapably political nature of curriculum theory, particularly as it relates to Sustainability, the perennial contest between holistic and specialist approaches to education, and the way these influences are expressed in the New Zealand Curriculum (NZC) (NZ Ministry of Education, 2007) and New Zealand’s National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA). In Section 2.6 I set out the theoretical basis and argument for the minimal SWM framework which served as the starting point for the co-construction, with my research participants, of an implementable SWM framework, as explained in Chapter 3


<hr>
<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2/#2">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2">➡️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.1/#2.1">⬆️</a></th>   
</tr></table>
