---
title: 2.2 The Anthropocene Sustainable Wellbeing Crisis
slug: c2.2
type: text
hidetitle: true
---

# 2.2 The Anthropocene Sustainable Wellbeing Crisis <a id="2.2"></a>

<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.1">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.3/#2.3">➡️</a></th> 
</tr></table>

### Sections:

[2.2](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2)  The Anthropocene Sustainable Wellbeing Crisis

* [2.2.1](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2.1) Time capsule—the poly-crisis circa 2024
* [2.2.2](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2.2) Nature-Disconnection, the Proximal Cause 
* [2.2.3](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2.3) Political dysfunction and Social tipping points
* [2.2.4](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2.4) Worldviews, Culture and the Ultimate Cause
* [2.2.5](/en/thesis/c2.2/#2.2.5) The Role of Education and Schools

<hr>

## 2.2.1 Time capsule—the poly-crisis circa 2024 <a id="2.2.1"></a>

Like so much else in our time, academic research in 2024 is increasingly stretched between the need to assimilate and respond effectively to the latest unprecedented developments—climatic, political, technological or cultural—and the search for pragmatic, long-term pathways toward wellbeing based on profound insights and eternal principles. The pursuit of Sustainable Wellbeing it could be argued has always guided human action. As a consequence of accumulated misguided or incomplete understanding of our planetary limits and the exponentially increasing consequences of our reproductive success and concurrent environmental pollution, our attention in the third decade of the twenty-first century is now demanded by one event after another related to unsustainable dysfunction in our relationships with the natural world, social justice, or cultures other than our own. The contemporary situation is referred to with various terms such as poly-crisis (Sachdeva, 2022) or meta-crisis (Milbank & Pabst, 2015; Zamorano Llena et al., 2023). *Eco-crisis* (Kaukko et al., 2021) is also a phrase, that for me, points to the root of the problem. Essentially the crisis is one of human disconnection. As Musson (2024) notes *Whilst in some ways we have evolved to extraordinary levels of [digital] connectivity, ironically we find ourselves suffering from all of the symptoms of chronic disconnection* (p. 20). This disconnection, from the rest of nature, from other people, and from self, is humanity’s Sustainable Wellbeing crisis. Climate Change is the leading edge, the most urgent unintended consequence of our disconnection.

Positive trends in the direction of true Sustainable Wellbeing are also evident but to date, they are regarded as insufficient to avoid collapse (Ambrose, 2023). We are leaving the calm, 12-thousand-year idyll of the Holocene and are beginning to feel the turbulence of the unknown Anthropocene. I use the term ‘Anthropocene’ here to mean no more than the age in which the human population of Earth is likely to exceed the maximum carrying capacity of the planet for our species before falling back to either managed or chaotic levels under the influence of planetary system corrective processes. The term is however not only problematic in terms of its precise definition (Randall, 2022), but also for its sociocultural implications. Klein (2017), for instance, argues that *the Anthropocene* effectively represents humans as an undifferentiated mass equally and collectively responsible for the costs and enjoying the benefits of the age, when this is very far from the truth.

The purpose of Section 2.2 is to provide some current—albeit soon to be outdated—examples of humanity’s impaired connections with nature, society, and self; to review what the literature says about how they are related, to how we might collectively manage our long-term sustainable wellbeing, and the implications of this knowledge for the evolution of secondary school education.


## 2.2.2 Nature-Disconnection, the Proximal Cause <a id="2.2.2"></a>

***Anthropogenic Climate Change***

Anthropogenic climate change is a consequence of our failure to appreciate and live within the ecological limits of our biosphere. It is a symptom of our disconnection from nature, which is the proximal cause of humanity’s accelerating global sustainability crisis. Dependence on carbon-based technologies—that pump waste gases, mainly carbon dioxide, and methane into the Earth’s atmosphere—is driving global warming and increasing the risk of extreme climate change. These technologies also dump waste materials including plastics and toxic chemicals into waterways and landfills, further exacerbating habitat destruction and accelerating biodiversity loss (Almond et al., 2022; Díaz et al., 2019; Kedward et al., 2023; Richardson, 2022). Climate extremes, nutrition insecurity, and biodiversity collapse are all symptoms of our inability to effectively manage the effluent of our global, industrial Business as Unsustainable (BaU) livelihood, which now threatens us with ecological and economic collapse within the next few decades (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018; NZ Ministry for the Environment, 2019; Quiggin et al., 2021; Ripple et al., 2019; Ritchie & Roser, 2017). These are the unintended consequences of a predatory but ultimately dysfunctional worldview—based on the temporary success of a strategy of competitive exploitation of the natural world and miscalculation of its limits—that has become hegemonic and entrenched over the last 200-500 years in the era of human globalisation.

The urgency and scale of the crisis have been made very clear by an effectively unanimous consensus of international climate scientists (Ripple et al., 2017, 2019). The pending impacts of humanity’s ecological ignorance that are already ‘locked in’ are expected to play out over a time frame of centuries and millennia (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2018), but the time frame within which we must act, to sufficiently contain the underlying anthropogenic drivers of the crisis and usefully limit their eventual cumulative effect is of the order of just decades and years, and it is rapidly shrinking. This is the world that our young people must be equipped by their education to navigate, and for the sake of humankind, to rescue. Greta Thunberg began her first *school strike for climate* in August 2018 when just 15 years old, sitting alone every day for three weeks outside the Swedish parliament building in the run-up to the Swedish elections (Verlie & Flynn, 2022). Greta was protesting to demand that the Swedish government adopt policies that would radically reduce the country’s carbon emissions. Two months later, in a press release announcing the Masson-Delmotte et al. (2018) report for the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) on limiting global warming to 1.5°C, the authors stated that:

> Limiting global warming to 1.5°C would require “rapid and far-reaching” transitions in land, energy, industry, buildings, transport, and cities. Global net human-caused emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) would need to fall by about 45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching ‘net zero’ around 2050.
> 
> (p. 14) 

More recent research has raised the concern that the climate models upon which the IPCC based its reports may be systematically underestimating the rate of global warming (Rantanen et al., 2022). 

***Carbon Emissions have continued to rise.***

As I write these words, in June 2024, almost six years have passed since the IPCC’s *45 percent by 2030* warning was issued. Far from falling 45 percent, global emissions have continued to rise (UNEP, 2023). As Carrington (2023) observes *Temperature records have already been obliterated in 2023 and intensifying heatwaves, floods and droughts have taken lives and hit livelihoods across the globe, in response to a temperature rise of 1.4C to date* (p. 1). The secretary general of the United Nations (UN), António Guterres, has repeatedly warned that the world is heading for a *hellish* future of 3°C of climate heating. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2023) report states that global temperature rise could be limited to 2°C if all the long-term pledges by countries to cut emissions to net zero by about 2050 were to be achieved. However, it concluded that these net zero pledges “are not currently considered credible” (Carrington, 2023, p. 2). A press release from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) ahead of the twenty-eighth conference of the parties to the convention, COP28, reached a similar conclusion stating: 

> The latest science from the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change indicates that greenhouse gas emissions need to be cut 43% by 2030, compared to 2019 levels. This is critical to limit temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius by the end of this century.
> 
> (UNFCCC, 2023, p. 1) 

Note that the baseline in this statement is now 2019 compared to the 2010 baseline cited in the IPCC’s 2018 warning above.

***Climate tipping points***

Adding to the concern around the effects of global warming on the habitability of the Earth for human beings and the species on which we depend is the likely existence of climate *tipping points* —also known as *bifurcation points* in complex system dynamics terms—with uncertain temperature and atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentration thresholds beyond which further warming becomes self-accelerating and effectively irreversible. Lenton et al. (2023) define a tipping point as occurring;

> when change in part of a system becomes self-perpetuating beyond a threshold, leading to substantial, widespread, frequently abrupt and often irreversible impact. This definition includes the possibilities of non-abrupt and reversible tipping points.
> 
> (2023, p. 9) 

For Earth’s biosphere, the major system tipping point lies between two alternative Stable states called the warm (W) state, like the one in which we live with temperatures around -3 to 30°C, and the snowball (SB) state, in which glaciation is global and average global surface temperatures are in the range -73° to -53°C (Lucarini & Bódai, 2020). For human beings, the most relevant climate tipping points lie above the (W) states. The loss of the Greenland Ice Sheet, for instance, *would ultimately lead to around seven metres of global sea-level rise* (Lenton et al., 2023, p. 11). 

Over many millions of years, the Earth has alternated between the (W) and (SB) Stable states, driven by fluctuations in solar irradiance and the balance between positive and negative feedback mechanisms. The positive feedback of ice albedo reflection accelerates cooling as solar irradiance falls and more ice forms, or conversely, above the solar irradiance tipping point, accelerates warming as the ice disappears and more heat-absorbent dark surfaces are revealed. The main negative feedback mechanism is the Boltzmann radiation relationship for dark surfaces which dramatically reduces heat lost by radiation to space as the planet’s surface cools and increases heat loss as the surface warms (Lucarini & Bódai, 2020). Other mechanisms affecting the tipping point dynamics and transition irradiance values include the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and the arrangement of the continents (2020). The existence of climate tipping points is relevant not only in light of humanity’s nature-disconnection but also because they illustrate tipping points and complex system dynamics in general which apply also to social phenomena.

## 2.2.3 Political dysfunction and Social tipping points <a id="2.2.3"></a>

***Political conflicts of interest are the biggest obstacle to resolving the Eco-crisis.***

The direction of global political will remains insufficiently altered by science-based scenarios of pending ecological and economic collapse. This inertia does not arise from any lack of strategies and available technologies to mitigate and adapt to the eco-crisis (Jacobson, 2022). Although the proximal cause of our sustainability crisis is Nature disconnection, the greatest obstacles to effectively addressing the crisis are socio-political. As I prepare to submit this thesis in January 2025, the citizens of the United States have just inaugurated a president and a governing party, to both their Senate and Congress, who explicitly maintain that the Climate Change emergency is a hoax.

Injustices and extreme inequalities undermine societies' and nations' capacities and will to cooperate for the elimination of ecological destruction, which in turn further exacerbates existing injustices and inequities (Bolstad & Overbye, 2022). The intergenerational commitment to BaU economics established over the past two and a half centuries has also entrenched substantial political inertia. As Lenton et al. (2023) observe, the actions driving us towards generally undesirable Earth system tipping points may benefit some people in some ways while being negative for the majority—for example, through fossil fuels extraction and use. Conversely, some minorities may be adversely impacted by actions towards avoiding such tipping points—for example farmers, by policies favouring plant-based agriculture rather than ruminant livestock farming.
 
Within nations, those at the top in the most influential positions of government and business with the personal resources for transitioning to sustainable lifestyles are also the greatest beneficiaries of dependence on fossil fuels. In 2013, the average GHG emissions per person in the UK for instance, was 8.8t (Ritchie et al., 2023). The richest 1%, however, used 147t per person, 36 times more than the poorest 10% who were responsible for just 4t per person (Kenner, 2019). Chancel (2022) observes that inequities within countries globally are now more significant than those between countries:

> Contrary to the situation in 1990, 63% of the global inequality in individual emissions is now due to a gap between low and high emitters within countries rather than between countries. 
> … the bulk of total emissions from the global top 1% of the world population comes from their investments rather than from their consumption.
> 
> (Chancel, 2022, Abstract) 

Individuals and families in the lower half of the socioeconomic hierarchy are, however, more often faced with choosing between a polluting high-carbon lifestyle and not putting food on the table. Talk of catastrophic climate change impacts on timescales of decades, centuries, or millennia may have little cut-through for the poorest groups. However, Chancel (2022) also notes that *While per-capita emissions of the global top 1% increased since 1990, emissions from low- and middle-income groups within rich countries declined* (Abstract). Despite these worthy improvements, effective strategies to meet global net zero emissions targets cannot rely on individual family lifestyle choices. Systemic transformation at the levels of communities, nations and globally will be required according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, n.d.; Zanden & Henzen, 2024).

***Inequity and Solving the Tragedy of the Commons***

In terms of humanity’s collective capacity to respond to climate change and environmental degradation, inequality matters. Universal equality would be very likely impossible to achieve and probably not even optimal in terms of global sustainable wellbeing, but extreme inequality and injustices are socially destabilising and wasteful. As Piketty (2014) shows, social wealth imbalances reached historical maxima just before major social upheavals and conflicts such as the French Revolution of 1789 and the two twentieth-century world wars. While the twentieth-century global conflicts acted as abrupt corrections to concurrent unsustainable and inequitable conditions in the global economy, by the 1980s the trend toward ever-increasing inequity had resumed (Chancel et al., 2017; Piketty, 2014). The exhausting effects of inequity, however, are present and debilitating for societies long before they provoke major conflicts. For instance, Wilkinson and Pickett (2010 cited in Scott, 2012) *present income inequality statistics from 21 countries in developed market democracies to show that health and social problems are higher in more unequal societies* (p. 28).

Based on the range of studies presented in their book Baland, Bardhan, and Bowles (2007) conclude *that in many settings inequality does indeed inhibit mutually beneficial approaches to the governance of the commons* (p. 8). The mechanisms they suggest for this effect include *pecuniary emulation* by the less wealthy of more wealthy, and more polluting social classes; the undersupply by governments of leisure-enhancing public goods like libraries which encourage less polluting activities; and the creation of what has been referred to as *sacrifice zones* (Sayre & Löwy, 2019, p. 125), inhabited by poorer communities to which wealthy communities can export their toxic wastes, avoid its impacts, and continue or increase their own polluting activities.

Reducing inequality, particularly poverty, has significant benefits for societal wellbeing and increases the likelihood of collective measures being taken to protect the environmental commons. Cross-cultural understanding and education have also been found to increase the likelihood of pro-environmental collective action. How culture and worldviews function as the ultimate cause of, and solution to, our crisis of Sustainable Wellbeing is taken up in Section 2.2.4.

***Social and Economic Tipping points both provoke fear and provide hope*** 

Just as there exist ecological tipping points so also there exists the potential for complex social systems and complexes of ecological, social, and technical systems to exhibit tipping points:

> Social systems, like physical and ecological systems, can have stable states (attractors) that resist change; they can exhibit path dependency and hysteresis; they can undergo non-linear change with positive feedback; and they can cross social tipping points into new stable states, over various timescales.
> 
> (Lenton et al., 2023, p. 11) 

Greta Thunberg’s 2018 protest outside the Swedish parliament instigated the worldwide school strike for climate protest—albeit limited to school students mainly in the large cities of affluent countries in the global north with non-authoritarian ruling regimes (Walker, 2020)—is an example of a social system experiencing such a tipping point. Other significant and unprecedented legal, political, and economic benchmarks are also continually being established and surpassed, indicating that large-scale global social transformation is gathering momentum. The first-ever climate case victory in the European Court of Human Rights was won In April 2024 by a group of older Swiss women. The court ruled that Switzerland had *failed to comply with its duties under the Convention concerning climate change* (RNZ, 2024) and that it had violated the right to respect for private and family life. *The ruling is binding and can trickle down to influence the law in 46 countries in Europe, including the UK*. At the same time, exponential trends of transformation in the global mix of energy sources are apparent, away from polluting fossil fuels and toward renewables:

> Renewables generated a record 30% of global electricity in 2023, driven by growth in solar and wind. With record construction of solar and wind in 2023, a new era of falling fossil generation is imminent. 2023 was likely the pivot point, marking peak emissions in the power sector. 
> 
> (Wiatros-Motyka et al., 2024, p. 6) 

Apart from its environmental superiority, the great social value of renewable energy sources, particularly solar, is the globally distributed and relatively low capital investment nature of the technology which makes possible not only increased energy equity but also greater overall energy system resilience (Khalid et al., 2023; O’Shaughnessy et al., 2024). This is particularly true in New Zealand. With our abundant hydropower capacity, more rooftop solar would mean that hydropower dams could be managed more effectively for energy storage and security (Poletti et al., 2024).

However, as Lenton et al. (2023) point out, social tipping point dynamics also operate in situations of social collapse or escalating conflict, where triggering events can enflame underlying tensions to a state of open warfare. Accelerating trends and tipping points apply to complex social systems as much as to ecosystems and the entanglements of the two but their ultimate effects and outcomes are finely balanced between benign and catastrophic attractor states so that the agency of individuals and small groups can always be decisive. The challenge for a Sustainable Wellbeing Metacurriculum (SWM) is to expose students to the diversity of circumstances that communities of people are experiencing around the country and the planet concerning climate change and the sustainable wellbeing crisis and to inspire their thinking, empathy and agency around the meaning and implications of the phrase *Just Transition*. 

## 2.2.4 Worldviews, Culture and the Ultimate Cause <a id="2.2.4"></a>

The agency of individuals and small groups is intimately entangled with their values, belief systems, worldviews and cultural heritage. In their research with high-level United Nations and European Commission climate policy advisors and coordinators, and parliamentarians, Wamsler and Bristow (2022) identified various ways in which habits of mind undermine pro-environmental behaviour change. *In-group bias* for instance can lead to the *out-grouping* or relegation of most of the natural world to sacrifice zones, as already described in earlier sections. Other cognitive distortions mentioned by their participants that make changing habits challenging and lead to “a vicious cycle of deteriorating personal and planetary wellbeing” (2022, p. 3) included:

> (i) polarised thinking (polarisation effect, confirmation bias), (ii) short-term thinking (hyperbolic discounting bias) and (iii) a tendency to blame or rely on others, and not take responsibility for action (bystander effect), all leading to a lack of agency and care. 
> 
> (2022, p. 6) 

At the deepest level, both environmental degradation and social inequities can be traced to the dominant cultural constructs of our time. Western-style growth-oriented, anthropocentric liberal capitalism and scientific positivism have become the default global worldview, marginalising indigenous and traditional conceptions that honoured nature, human ancestral connection, and belonging to nature (whakapapa) (Eames & Mardon, 2020). Our belief that the human self is *unique and deserving with an identity distinct from, but of equal worth to, all others* (Scott, 2012, p. 21) has become integral to the free-market conception of economics dependent on exploiting nature (p. 21).

This is not to dismiss, however, the extraordinary progress our species has made over the last 200-250 years in terms of technologies, built environment development, and standards of living, in aggregate at least if not equitability, and the strengths of human nature along with its egotism that made that progress possible. As Johan Norberg (2016) observes, many measures of global wellbeing have improved dramatically in these two and half centuries including life expectancies, which have more than doubled since 1770 (Our World in Data, n.d.), the proportion of people living in poverty which has fallen from around 90% to just 10% (Bourguignon & Morrisson, 2002, p. 731; Cruz et al., 2015, p. 8), and illiteracy which has fallen by the same proportions (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2014, p. 92). The incidence of violence within states and the lethal consequences of wars among them have also trended downward over time (Norberg, 2016).

In 2022, Norberg, who was a senior fellow at the Cato Institute—a Washington DC-based libertarian think tank (Cato Institute, 2024)—explained in an interview that he sees innovation and political freedom as the fundamental drivers of our modern age of progress:

> The major change [in the eighteenth century] was that, for the first time, we had a sufficiently big crack in the wall—the old centralized mercantilist economy run by nobles and kings who decided who did what and restricted production and trade. Lots of creativity began to pass through that crack and change everything, from the dramatic—steam engines, textile manufacturing, modern infrastructure, steamboats, cars, and planes—to the everyday.
> 
> (Walker-Werth & Walker-Werth, 2022, p. 87) 

The difference, however, between the freedom to innovate for the benefit of Self and Society, and the freedom to exploit society and nature for the benefit of the innovator, is a distinction that Norberg (2016) doesn’t appear to make. In his chapter on world progress in environmental standards, he cites examples of improvements such as the management of pollution in London since the Great Smog of 1952 and air pollution reductions in the United Kingdom since 1970. All examples he uses are associated with the mitigation of the initial detrimental impacts of industrialization. Such is his belief in the power of human creativity to solve any problem that he writes *Today, it seems like technology and affluence are not an obstacle to environmental sustainability, but rather its precondition* (2016, p. 113). Expanding our historical horizon back beyond the modern industrial era, the more relevant question begged by the dramatic improvement of wellbeing statistics over the last 250 years may not be, *How was it achieved?*, but rather *How did things ever get so bad?*

Contrary to the traditional view suggested by Norberg (2016), that the life of early hunter-gatherer peoples before the dawn of the agrarian revolution some 12,000 years ago was nasty, brutish and short, Gurven & Kaplan (2007), concluded from their cross-cultural study that *extensive longevity appears to be a novel feature of Homo sapiens* (p. 349). Their *data show that modal adult life span [was] 68–78 years, and that it was not uncommon for individuals to reach these ages* (p. 349). The relative importance of aggression and competition versus nonaggression and cooperation in the lives of hunter-gatherers has also been long debated in the literature. In his recent interdisciplinary study, Lee (2018) argues that *cooperative breeding and child-rearing, as well as management of conflict, flexible land tenure, and balanced gender relations* (Abstract), have been central to human evolution. How can we explain then the apparent capitulation to modernity of the hunter-gatherers—including the ancestors of many Indigenous peoples still dealing with Western European colonialism in the 21st century—to the erosion of their relatively healthy lifestyles sustained over many tens of thousands of years? The onset of rapid climate change in earlier epochs has been suggested as generating socio-environmental tipping points forcing the adoption of farming, which through its productivity led to population growth and a cycle of ever more children to labour on farms and greater dependency Slowly accelerating population growth itself may also have been an increasingly important factor leading to imperialism, colonisation and the aggregation of tribes into nations for greater security.

Return to a pre-agrarian era of hunter-gatherer lifestyle wellbeing when the world population was just 4 million (Suzman, 2020, as cited in Anthony, 2021), is not an option in a world of more than 8 billion human beings. However, the wisdom contained in those lifestyles in terms of sustainable human relationships with the natural world and one another remains embedded in many living Indigenous cultures. At the same time, techno-overly optimistic solutions to our Eco-crisis need to be seen for the unhelpful magical thinking they are. Undoubtedly technology and innovation will play a decisive role in meeting human survival and wellbeing challenges in the Anthropocene, but not by doubling down on Business as Unsustainable, discounting the scientific consensus on Climate Change risks and waiting for science and innovation to solve the problem. A favourite refuge of hope for techno-optimists is Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) (Harvey et al., 2019; Morrison, 2024; Schlanger, 2024). Sober economic and scientific research is less sanguine. *CO2 utilization is not an end in itself, and these pathways solely or even collectively will not provide a key solution to climate change* (Hepburn et al., 2019, p. 95). *CO2 utilization* here refers to various technologies that remove CO2 directly from the emissions of industrial processes or the atmosphere including not just CCS but also biological or land-based forms of CO2 utilization such as farming and forestry. According to Morrison (2024), the true cost of a CCS industry capable of making any serious contribution to the current total of energy-related CO2 emissions each year is infeasibly great. He concludes:

> The promotion of CCS by the fossil fuel sector aims to maintain business as usual, not to reduce [the] production of oil and gas, meaning emissions of this scale will continue into the future. A cheaper option to reduce emissions is to move to cleaner forms of energy production. 
> 
> (p. 4) 

It is of existential significance for humankind, I argue, that today’s secondary school students have the opportunity to be aware of, and critically examine, the full range of worldviews relevant to their sustainable wellbeing and that of their descendants. Not only are they at the age when personal life values are first being formed and career paths are chosen, but they are facing what may prove to be the pivotal decade of opportunity for any generation to maximise human agency for a sustainable future.

## 2.2.5 The Role of Education and Schools <a id="2.2.5"></a>

Education and educational leadership have an essential role to play in moving society from vicious toward virtuous cycles of thinking (Wamsler & Bristow, 2022) which reinforce behaviour, dispositions, and worldviews that address the eco-crisis, climate change, and sustainable wellbeing (Bolstad, 2023; Eames & Bolstad, 2023; Everth et al., 2021a; Everth & Bright, 2022). The potential for education to leverage an effective societal response to the Anthropocene Eco-crisis is however under-appreciated by academics, scientists and policy-makers outside of education (Eames & Bolstad, 2023; Everth et al., 2021a). On the time scale of years and decades, that we are now facing, primary and secondary school education may arguably have more effect on society's effective response to the crisis than attempting to persuade adults who are already committed to unsustainable livelihoods and lifestyles.

Education for Sustainability and Wellbeing is intrinsically cross-curricular and holistic. In nurturing positive behavioural change for Sustainability and Wellbeing, the interaction between culture and cognition on one hand, and nature and socio-emotional connectedness on the other, is two-way. New actions and experiences lead to new beliefs and narratives about what is possible. New beliefs lead to innovation and further exploration. Both processes are mediated and reaffirmed by socio-emotional competencies. Wamsler and Bristow (2022) stress the importance of the *whole school* approach for Education for Sustainability (EfS) in reinforcing this virtuous positive feedback cycle between action and belief systems and make the following recommendations (including a quotation from one of their participants):

> Measures include, for instance, the revision of school curricula, the integration of caring for the environment in the school’s culture/values, the involvement of the surrounding community in local projects and the revision of related national regulations and policies. The latter could ensure that learning for sustainability is made a legal entitlement for every school child, including outdoor learning as a regular and progressive part of the education. 
> 
> (Wamsler & Bristow, 2022, p. 15)

While the present study fully supports the recommendations of these authors it also recognises that secondary school education in its final three years necessarily requires students to make future career-oriented Subject-Based specialisation choices. Specialisation is not only productive for the collective needs of society—in terms of the diversity of skills required to sustain a complex and adaptive economy—it also motivates students’ learning by catering to their particular interests and strengths. This research project aimed to provide greater detail and deeper insights into exactly what an educational response to the Eco-crisis might look like for senior secondary students in Aotearoa New Zealand, which provides both sustainable wellbeing education as a core requirement and the opportunity to pursue specialised career paths. Central to this response is the co-construction, with my teacher research participants, of a Sustainable Wellbeing Metacurriculum (SWM) framework based on complex adaptive systems theory. The following section introduces the key ideas from complexity theory that inspired my *minimal SWM framework* starting point but also informed the interpretation of my participants' views on what enables successful Sustainable Wellbeing (SW) education implementation in schools and communities when viewed as complex adaptive systems.

<hr>
<table><tr>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.1">⬅️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.3/#2.3">➡️</a></th>
 <th scope="col" style="width: 50px;"><a href="/en/thesis/c2.3/#2.2">⬆️</a></th> 
</tr></table>
